docs: Describe top-level architecture of SDK (#1599)
contentauth/c2pa-rs: sdk/src/README.md

# C2PA SDK architecture

This document describes the outermost architectural layer of the c2pa SDK. The SDK implements the C2PA (Coalition for Content Provenance and Authenticity) specification, providing functionality to create, embed, read, and validate C2PA manifests in digital assets.

## Architectural overview

> The SDK follows a layered architecture that separates concerns between user-facing APIs, data models, storage, asset I/O, cryptography, and validation.

Reviewer: I would call `user-facing APIs` -> `public APIs`. It's what they are,e ventually.

    end
    
    subgraph "Storage layer"
        Store[store.rs]
        JUMBF[jumbf/]
        ResourceStore[resource_store.rs]
    end
    
    subgraph "Asset I/O layer"
        AssetIO[asset_io.rs]
        AssetHandlers[asset_handlers/]
        JumbfIO[jumbf_io.rs]
    end
    
    subgraph "Cryptography layer"
        Crypto[crypto/]
        Signer[signer.rs]
        CoseSign[cose_sign.rs]
        CoseValidator[cose_validator.rs]
    end
    
    subgraph "Validation layer"
        ValidationResults[validation_results.rs]
        ValidationStatus[validation_status.rs]
        StatusTracker[status_tracker/]
    end
    
    Builder --> Claim
    Builder --> Store
    Builder --> Signer
    
    Reader --> Store
    Reader --> Manifest
    Reader --> ValidationResults
    
    Claim --> Assertions
    Claim --> ResourceStore
    Manifest --> Ingredient
    Manifest --> Assertions
    
    Store --> JUMBF
    Store --> AssetIO
    Store --> CoseValidator
    
    AssetIO --> AssetHandlers
    AssetIO --> JumbfIO
    
    CoseValidator --> Crypto
    Signer --> Crypto
    
    style Builder fill:#fff4e1
    style Reader fill:#e1f5ff
    style Store fill:#e8f5e9

>     style Crypto fill:#f3e5f5

Reviewer 2: <img width="744" height="225" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c09ba9fd-dd71-4f3b-ac40-ec299f7c98fa" />

```

## Module organization

### Public API layer

The outermost layer provides high-level APIs for common workflows.

#### `Builder` ([builder.rs](builder.rs))

Creates and signs C2PA manifests. The `Builder` provides both declarative (JSON-based) and imperative (method-based) interfaces for constructing manifests.

##### Key responsibilities

- Assemble manifest definitions from ingredients, assertions, and resources
- Coordinate with signers to create cryptographic signatures

> - Embed signed manifests into assets via asset handlers

Reviewer 2: Yes internally we reference them as asset handlers. I usually like to refer to them as parsers although I'm not sure what language is most clear.

##### Key responsibilities

- Maintain claim structure (assertions, ingredients, signature)
- Manage assertion instances and uniqueness
- Handle redactions and assertion references
- Support claim versioning (v1, v2)
- Provide CBOR serialization/deserialization

##### Depends on

- [`Assertion`](#assertion-assertionrs)
- [`assertions/`](#assertions)
- [`hashed_uri.rs`](hashed_uri.rs)
- [`ResourceStore`](#resourcestore-resource_storers)

#### `Manifest` ([manifest.rs](manifest.rs))

User-facing representation of a validated C2PA manifest. Manifests are created from claims during validation.

##### Key responsibilities

- Present validated claim data in user-friendly format
- Provide assertion lookup and decoding
- Expose ingredient hierarchy
- Include signature information
- Support JSON serialization for reporting

##### Depends on

- [`Claim`](#claim-claimrs)
- [`Ingredient`](#ingredient-ingredientrs)
- [`assertions/`](#assertions)
- [`ResourceStore`](#resourcestore-resource_storers)

#### `Ingredient` ([ingredient.rs](ingredient.rs))

> Represents a source asset (parent or component) used in creating the current asset. Ingredients can have their own C2PA provenance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Represents a source asset (with relationships parent or component in the current manifest) used in creating the current asset. Ingredients may have their own C2PA provenance.
```

#### `ManifestAssertion` ([manifest_assertion.rs](manifest_assertion.rs))

Container for assertions within manifests, supporting multiple storage formats (CBOR, JSON, binary).

##### Key responsibilities

- Wrap assertion data with label and instance information
- Support different assertion kinds (CBOR, JSON, Binary, URI)
- Track created vs gathered assertions
- Provide type-safe assertion decoding

### Storage layer (internal)

Manages persistence and serialization of C2PA data.

#### `Store` ([store.rs](store.rs))

The internal manifest store that manages one or more claims and their relationships. This is the central hub for C2PA data before it's written to or after it's read from an asset.

##### Key responsibilities

- Manage claim graph (active claim, parent claims, update manifests)
- Handle JUMBF serialization/deserialization
- Coordinate validation across claims
- Support remote manifests
- Manage update manifest chains

##### Depends on

- [`Claim`](#claim-claimrs)
- [`jumbf/`](#jumbf)
- [`asset_io.rs`](#asset_iors)
- [`cose_validator.rs`](#cose_validatorrs)
- [`status_tracker/`](#status_tracker)

#### [jumbf/](jumbf/)

> JUMBF (JPEG Universal Metadata Box Format) is the container format used to store C2PA data in assets. This module provides the box structure and label management.

Reviewer: Define the acronym when it is first used, please!

TO DO: Create [asset_handlers/README.md](asset_handlers/README.md) to describe asset handler modules.

#### [jumbf_io.rs](jumbf_io.rs)

High-level JUMBF I/O operations that coordinate between asset handlers and JUMBF serialization.

##### Key responsibilities

- Load JUMBF from asset streams (via appropriate handler)
- Save JUMBF to asset streams (via appropriate handler)
- Support multiple asset formats through handler registry
- Provide format detection

##### Depends on

- [`asset_handlers/`](#asset_handlers)
- [`jumbf/`](#jumbf)

### Cryptography layer

Handles all cryptographic operations including signing, validation, and certificate handling.

#### [crypto/](crypto/)

A module providing core cryptography primitives using either OpenSSL and Rust-native implementations.

TO DO: Create [asset_handlers/README.md](asset_handlers/README.md) to describe asset handler modules.

#### `Signer` and `AsyncSigner` ([signer.rs](signer.rs))

Defines the `Signer` and `AsyncSigner` traits that abstract over different signing implementations. This allows the SDK to work with various signing mechanisms (local keys, HSMs, remote services, etc.).

> ##### Key responsibilities

Reviewer: Isn't that `Coordinate with timestamp authorities`? Or do you mean more details?

- [`Store`](#store-storers)

#### [validation_status.rs](validation_status.rs)

Individual validation status codes as defined in the C2PA specification.

##### Key responsibilities

- Define all C2PA validation status codes
- Provide status code metadata (success/info/failure)
- Support status code URLs and documentation
- Enable filtering and categorization of validation issues

##### Depends on

- [`status_tracker/`](#status_tracker)

#### [status_tracker/](status_tracker/)

Internal tracking of validation and processing events during reading and signing.

##### Key components

- [`mod.rs`](status_tracker/mod.rs) - Main `StatusTracker` type
- [`log_item.rs`](status_tracker/log_item.rs) - Individual logged events

##### Key responsibilities

- Record validation events as they occur
- Support filtering by label/URI
- Provide event iteration and reporting
- Convert to user-facing validation results

### Identity layer

[CAWG (Creator Assertions Working Group)](https://cawg.io) identity assertion support, including W3C Verifiable Credentials and X.509 credential binding.

TO DO: Create [identity/README.md](identity/README.md) to describe identity modules.

### Specialized modules

> #### [dynamic_assertion.rs](dynamic_assertion.rs)

Reviewer: Isn't that a key module? Eg. to add CAWG data on signing?

Support for assertions that are generated dynamically during the signing process. This allows signers to add assertions that depend on the final claim state.

##### Key responsibilities

- Define `DynamicAssertion` trait
- Support both sync and async dynamic assertions
- Provide partial claim information to dynamic assertions
- Enable runtime assertion generation

##### Depends on

- [`Claim`](#claim-claimrs)
- [`Signer`](#signer-and-asyncsigner-signerrs)

#### [http/](http/)

HTTP client abstractions supporting multiple backends for network operations (OCSP, remote manifests, timestamp authorities).

TO DO: Create [http/README.md](http/README.md) to describe HTTP-related modules.

### Supporting modules

#### [settings/](settings/)

> SDK-wide configuration system using thread-local settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SDK-wide configuration system using *thread-local* settings.
```
It needs the emphasis, currently.
